Hiedeggar - 
essence of Technology

What Constitutes the essence of technology for hiedeggar. Do you think Heidegger’s understanding of technology is monolithic and deterministic? Discuss with respect to the post-phenomenological critiques advanced by Verbeeck and others.

Constitution of essence of technology for Hiedeggar :

According to Hiedeggar the essence of modern technology shows itself in Enframing. [ What is essence of old technology then?? Or essence of technology in general. ]

There are different point of views to look at technology, such as the instrumental view(technology as means) ,technology can also be viewed as a bringing-forth (of culture/traditions of society,skill of technicians,etc ) called revealing. Technology is a way of revealing. When we look at technology as revealing we find a difference between revealing of older technology and the modern technology. The revealing throughtout modern technology has the character of a setting-upon
[what is setting-upon; ] in the sense of a challenging forth. [Here setting-upon means a setting that challenges ,claim, invitationf for fight sort of a thing ??].
This challenging is that modern technology ,in contrast to older not only utilizes the energy of nature by as it is i.e., as that energy is used in nature like washing in a runnung river or sowing seeds in the ground and letting them grow using the water and nutrients in the soil, but the energy hidden in nature is transformed to other forms, stored for future use ,this stored energy is distributed wherein it is again transformed or used or redistributed . This is the challenge. The unlocking ,storing ,distributing and switching are all forms of revealing of modern tech while in older tech it would stop at unlocking. These processes repeat in cycles such that two more features - regulating and securing - go with the revealing. The peculiarity of the unconcealment / unlocking that happens in challenging-revealing is that that which is being unconcealed is ordered(made to) to stand by ,to be immediately available , the unconcealed is made available always ,till further ordering as to what is to be done with it. Hiedeggar calls this which is unconcealed then made to stand by a "standing - reserve" .The standing-reserve is more than a mere object. A standing-reserve can be understood as follows - [The airliner shit that can be added later.]

Explain the terms - "setting-upon","ordering","standing-reserve".
setting-upon - the setting , stage
ordering - commanded sorta
standing-reserve - self explanatory
presencing

Man is ,even before nature ,is challenged to exploit the energy in nature.Thus man is "ordered" before nature by the Enframing (essence of technology) but does not become a standing-reserve,(as nature becomes). This is because the ordering of man is a form of revealing itself.The moment a man is challenged forth revealing of "the real" has started but this is not yet the unconcealment brought about by technology. Man is the one who drives technology ,so after he/she finishes that which is ordered upon him/her , he then proceeds to operate the technology,which orders nature thus leading to revealing.This prevents man from becoming a standing-reserve. Though man does take part in ordering and revealing ,the revealing itself is never brought about by man and he has no control on it.THe quality of revealing is decided by the technology alone.

The unconcealment begins the moment man is challenged to strive ,to work to "presence" technology ,he approahces nature as the object of his research till nautre becomes beyond object ,the standing-reserve. The unconcealment has already come to pass when man is called into modes of revealing alotted to him. Thus there is a hand beyond man's in modern technologies ordering revealing (ordering revealing = the revealing which is brought about by nature being ordered into its modes).This is the challenge that brings man under order and sets man unto ordering nature/real as standing-reserve in accordance with which it does show itself is the Enframing.
Enframing means the gathering together of that setting-upon which sets upon man i.e., challenges hin forth, to reveal the real, in the mode of ordering ,as standing-reserve .The nuts and bolts of technology which work to make unconcealment happen ,this act is acting upon the challenge of Enframing but it does not comprise Enframing itself.
[##########INSERT MODERN PHYSICS STORY##########################]

 Chronological does not determine that which orders initially only reveals itself ultimately. 




 

    
 
  


Enframing is the challenging-claim which gathers man thither to order the self-revealing as standing-reserve.


Enframing means the gathering together of that setting-upon which sets upon man i.e., challenges him forth , to reveal the real ,in the mode of ordering, as standing-reserve .Enframing means that way of revealing which holds sway in the essence of modern technology and which is itself nothing technological.

Describe destining here ############page 24 to 25###############



Enframing is the way in which real reveals itself as standing reserve.     

Enframing as destining $$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$
destining as danger $$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$
Enframing as NOT a genus of all technology$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$


monolithic - 


formed of a single large block of stone.

(of an organization or system) large, powerful, indivisible, and slow to change.

Deterministic -

relating to the philosophical doctrine that all events, including human action, are ultimately determined by causes regarded as external to the will.

Yes, I think Hiedeggar's philosophy of technology, pivoted by the essence of technology, is deterministic. Hiedeggar's revealing happens not beyond human doing but neither in man or through man. The destining of man blah blah Enframing ordering challenging. Man stands within the essential realm of Enframing and in mode of ordering but the true result of his doings - the real - only come forth lately and he cannot through his doing affect the revealing but rather the revealing orders him what to do posing as a challenge ,the quality is only determined by the technology made by man in mode of ordering. he has no understanding of the real when in this mode nor can he influence it in any way.

Hiedeggar in his work Question concerning Tech clains that his Enframing is not a genus for every thing technological but makes no attempt to look at technology in a different light and is seemingly firm in his theory/ideas of technology so Hiedeggar is essentially monolithic.

This (Hiedeggar being monolithis in his idea) forms the basis for the critic of Verbeeck and the post-phenomenologists. Hiedeggar's insistence to look at technology as something beyond 'mere' objects and there is the 'danger' of destining and other ideas that ring similar to the alienation of technology idea of Karl Marx.


Verbeeck and post-phenomenologists main critic of the classical philosophers is as follows :
classical philosophy of technology is merely as illustrations of the origins or presuppositions of the technology and not as points of departure for investigation into how  technologies concretely shape human life (hiedeggar technology beyond object).  

Classical philosophers of technology have painted an excessively gloomy picture
of the role of technology in contemporary culture, worrying that technology
would end up alienating human beings from themselves and reality. 
human beings from approaching reality as inherently valuable and would instead
encourage them to approach it as raw material. In the technological organization
of contemporary social life, human beings no longer appear as unique individuals
but only as functional workers needed to keep the highly structured apparatus of
mass production working

The
phenomenological tradition, or at least the work in the philosophy of technology
that takes its cue from Heidegger, conceives of technoscience as a particular kind of
interpretation of reality, and fails to see its operativity, 
 Heidegger and Jaspers have drawn attention to an
important dimension of technology; namely, the relation between technology and
the way in which human beings interpret and engage their world. That perspective,
however, can be filled in much better by seeking a closer contact with technology
itself, which is precisely what becomes possible via an analysis of technology in
terms of its concrete artifacts. —would
substitute forward for backward thinking. 


The work of Jaspers and Heidegger represents the two poles of the phenomenological tradition within the philosophy of technology: existential phenomenology,
in which the central question is how human beings realize their existence and thus
are present in their world, and hermeneutical phenomenology, which examines the
ways in which reality is interpreted and thus is present for human beings. But not
only have phenomenology’s offspring in the philosophy of technology come
under fire, so has phenomenology itself, by virtue of the romantic and essentialist
manner in which its investigations are sometimes carried out. These investigations sometimes arouse suspicion that phenomenology strives for “authentic”
contact with “reality itself,” to contrast that with the alleged alienation produced
by science and technology.


##########MAIN###########

“The thing things.” Heidegger’s phrase expresses the thought that what a thing “does”
has to be understood from out of the thing itself, without
being reduced to something non-thingly.Tech should
also be analyzed in terms of concrete artifacts that play a role
in the relation between human beings and their world.
 Heidegger raises the
hermeneutical issue of the role technology plays in the way human beings
encounter and interpret reality



In the process I shall broach a number of accusations that are regularly made
in connection with Heidegger’s philosophy, such as that it is “monolithic,”
“abstract,” and “nostalgic.” Heidegger is often charged with having had too little
contact with concrete technological practices and with wrongly opposing himself
unilaterally to the changes wrought by technology. Although to a large extent I
share these views, I find that they remain too superficial to adequately criticize
Heidegger.3 They remain too external to Heidegger’s analysis and therefore are in
their own specific ways too monolithic and abstract as well. I will, therefore, elaborate these forms of criticism and relate them to the transcendental manner of
thinking that I have already described. This will make clear that Heidegger can
support his nostalgic preference for traditional technology only by selectively
drawing from two different—and incompatible—approaches to technology


Questions t Heidegger poses about technology: What is
the significance of technology for the way human beings encounter reality; and
how does it affect the manner in which they interpret the world?

Heidegger points out, technological objects are
means for ends, and are built and operated by human beings, but the essence of
technology is something else entirely. Just as the essence of a tree is not itself a
tree, Heidegger notes, so the essence of technology is not anything technological.
Technology, according to Heidegger, is  “a way of revealing” 

. It is his translation of the Greek word alètheuein,
which means to dis-cover, or draw out of concealment—to uncover what was
covered over. Related to this verb is the independent noun alètheia, usually
translated as “truth,” though Heidegger insists that a more adequate translation
would be “un-concealment.”


Pg 50

There can only be revealing when
there already exists a particular understanding of what “being unconcealed”
means. 
 The unconcealment of the unconcealed has already come to pass
whenever it calls man forth into the modes of revealing allotted to him” (Heidegger
1977a, 18–19).
The relation between humans and being is the linchpin of Heidegger’s entire
thought.

The forgetting of being, according to Heidegger, began with Plato. 
The capstone of the forgetting of being, as far as philosophy goes, was set into
place by Friedrich Nietzsche, in whose work “being” means merely “being usable
for the Will to Power.” This last meaning of being, according to Heidegger, finds
its material realization in modern technology. Being comes to mean: available for
production and manipulation, raw material, “standing-reserve.”4

 “Technology is a mode of alètheuein. It
reveals whatever does not bring itself forth and does not yet lie here before us” (13).
Technology as technè needs to be understood, according to Heidegger, as a manner
of revealing involving a transition from concealment to unconcealment, and he
elaborates this point with reference to the famous Aristotelian doctrine of causality

Modern technology, according to Heidegger,  thus involves a much different way
of disclosure than the technè of the Greeks. It is no longer a bringing-forward but
a setting-upon, a challenging and ordering. Modern technology approaches reality
as raw material that is on call to be put to use.

Tech as enframing 54

 shows why technology for Heidegger must not be conceived as a means to an end. Heidegger’s next move is to show that this technological way of revealing is not a human activity. 

Tech as greatest danger pg 56

In “The Question Concerning Technology,” Heidegger not only discusses the
issue of how modern technology must be understood, but concludes with an evaluation of it: the Gestell, he claims, is to be seen as a danger, even as “the greatest
danger.” But what is so dangerous about technology?

 Heidegger calls the danger harbored by the Gestell “the greatest danger.”
He gives two reasons for this. First, it threatens humanity himself, for “he comes
to the very brink of a precipitous fall; that is, he comes to the point where he
himself will have to be taken as standing-reserve” (27). When human beings take
themselves as standing-reserve, they lose not only themselves but also the ability
to be open for being, for the “happening” of “coming into being.” Second, when
the Gestell holds sway, it “drives out every other possibility of revealing” (27).
The danger of the Gestell is thus not only that the event of being is neglected; in
addition, because the Gestell reduces everything to human domination and control, it becomes no longer even possible to think about being and the process of
56 | what things do
03.Verbeek Chapter 2 1/17/05 2:03 PM Page 56
emergence from unconcealment.

vealing and hence to experience the call of a more primal truth” (8).
Nevertheless, Heidegger saw a way out of the danger. His argument takes an
almost dialectical turn when he claims that the danger harbors in itself also a saving
power, and quotes the following lines from Friedrich Hölderlin: “Wo aber
Gefahr ist, wächst / Das Rettende auch” [But where danger is, grows / The saving
power also]

 Thinking about the essence
of technology thus allows them to address being, and brings to light the process
of revealing once again.


According to Heidegger, human beings are becoming “encircled ever more tightly by the forces of
technology. 
 This
simultaneous affirmation and denial of the technological world is a relation or
comportment that Heidegger calls “releasement toward things. Together
with releasement toward things, openness to the mystery allows “the possibility
of dwelling in the world in a totally different way” .



Heidegger’s hermeneutical approach. Heidegger’s views on technology, which in
contrast to those of Jaspers are still influential, remain controversial.

Hiedeggar philosophy of technology :three charges that are regularly lodged against it:
that it is monolithic, abstract, and nostalgic.His work is said to be monolithic
because he allows no room in his approach for an alternative technological
practice; abstract because he single-mindedly focuses on technological thinking
rather than on concrete technologies, and nostalgic because he often contrasts
the present unfavorably with the exalted past.

that the
charges of abstractness and of a monolithic character can be seen to arise from
the fact that Heidegger, like Jaspers, employs a transcendentalist style of reasoning,  Heidegger can support his nostalgic preference
for a pretechnological relation with reality only by selectively navigating between
two different approaches, one historical and one ahistorical.


Abstract and Monolithic: Heidegger’s Transcendentalism

The American philosopher of technology Andrew Feenberg, working from the
Frankfurt School tradition, is typical of those who critique Heidegger’s abstractness and the monolithic character of his thought. He praises Heidegger for his
refusal to see technology as a collection of neutral means and for his claim that, in
some sense, we are not the masters of our own technology but in its grip. 

Nevertheless, he adopts an extremely critical position toward Heidegger. For Feenberg,
Heidegger’s philosophy of technology is too abstract, too remote from concrete
technological practices.

 He observes that Heidegger
hopes for “a vaguely evoked spiritual renewal” but finds that his work is “too
abstract to inform a new technical practice.”6 Heidegger’s abstract reasoning
means that “he literally cannot discriminate between electricity and atom bombs,
agricultural techniques and the Holocaust” (Feenberg 1999, 187). This high level
of abstraction makes Heidegger’s philosophy of technology at the same time too
general: by declaring modern technology a stage in the history of being, Heidegger
leaves no room for the development of alternative technological practices. Technology simply has the essence of the Gestell. Not technology itself, but our way of
thinking and disclosing reality will change in the next epoch of the history of
being—one for which we can only wait expectantly.

 Feenberg ignores Heidegger’s claim that the essence of technology is
itself nothing technological. Feenberg is addressing the way in which Heidegger looks at technology—
not at the specific technologies of our world, but rather at technology as a form
of world-disclosure.And the manner in which technologies disclose reality, according to Heidegger,
is not determined by these technologies themselves, but rather by “being.” The
“revealing” of technology always already receives its form from the ruling way of
the “unconcealment” of the Gestell.

and when Feenberg writes enthusiastically about
the need to develop a new technological practice, any Heideggerian will be able
to throw that remark back at him, pointing out that this would be just another
expression of the will to power and would simply reinscribe the Gestell in a more
sophisticated way. Heidegger does not want an alternative technological practice,
for he does not want to think on the ontic level (that of beings), but rather on the
ontological level (that of being). Were Feenberg to engage in a serious discussion
with Heidegger, either he would have to claim that only an ontic approach to technology is adequate, or he would have to critique Heidegger’s ontological analysis. A
the thing about technology | 61
6. See paragraph 13 of Feenberg (2004).
03.Verbeek Chapter 2 1/17/05 2:03 PM Page 61
true critique cannot be based on the consequences of an approach, but must
rather be directed at the approach itself.The reason, according to Feenberg, that leads Heidegger to lump together agricultural techniques and atomic bombs is that he sees
technology “merely as different expressions of the identical enframing” .


Heidegger does not approach technology (ontically) in terms of
concrete technological artifacts, but (ontologically) as a form of world-disclosure.
And the manner in which technologies disclose reality, according to Heidegger,
is not determined by these technologies themselves, but rather by “being.” The
“revealing” of technology always already receives its form from the ruling way of
the “unconcealment” of the Gestell.
Technology thus does not itself create, according to Heidegger, a specific form
of world-disclosure, but is instead a manifestation of one. 




 Feenberg is addressing the way in which Heidegger looks at technology—
not at the specific technologies of our world, but rather at technology as a form
of world-disclosure.And the manner in which technologies disclose reality, according to Heidegger,
is not determined by these technologies themselves, but rather by “being.” The
“revealing” of technology always already receives its form from the ruling way of
the “unconcealment” of the Gestell. For Heidegger, it is not
technologies that disclose reality but the ruling way of unconcealment. Technologies are only manifestations or expressions of a form of disclosing reality,
 Heidegger appears to be proceeding
not ontologically but ontically. His words reveal that, for him, what is happening
is not that the construction of an electrical generating plant has brought about
the transformation of the Rhine into standing-reserve, but rather the other way
around—that the unlocking of the Rhine as standing-reserve has brought about
the construction of an electrical power plant in it. 

Is this an exceptional case, or is it representative of Heidegger’s approach?
in “The Question Concerning Technology” but also in texts
the thing about technology | 63
03.Verbeek Chapter 2 1/17/05 2:03 PM Page 63
such as What is Called Thinking, where Heidegger writes, “Our age is not technological because it is the age of the machine; it is rather the age of the machine
because it is the technological age.”7 Seubold therefore concludes that technological
devices “can only be made when the technological way of revealing has already
set in” (Seubold 1986, 195).But the connection between “ontic technology” and “ontological technology,”
according to Seubold, is more than that the latter is the condition of the former;

Feenberg is correct to claim that Heidegger’s
work is too abstract to inspire a new technological practice—but if Heidegger is
right in claiming that each technological practice depends on the Gestell as a
specific “sending of being,” there cannot be an alternative technological practice. 


Heidegger is thus “abstract” in a quite specific manner: he abstracts from
concrete technology by reducing it to its condition of possibility. 

the question we should ask is what more there is to say about the relation
between technology and meaning.While Heidegger may be right that a specific, technological way of
interpreting reality (on the ontological level) is required for modern technology
to come about, we should also conclude that the role of technology (on the ontic
level) in our culture cannot be understood in terms of this specific way of interpreting only. When they are used, technologies may make it possible for human
beings to have a relation with reality that is much richer than those they have
with a manipulable stock of raw materials.y. We should also analyze in what ways they, in their functioning, create
new ways of access to reality for human beings. Heidegger, as it were, annexes
technology to philosophy, reducing it to a form of thinking and then analyzing
that thinking as if it were a brand of philosophy.
The philosophy of technology needs to take specific technologies more seriously than Heidegger does; in Hottois’s terms, it needs to try to elucidate its operativity.

A philosophical analysis of the role of technology in the modern world
cannot rest with reducing technology to forms of interpretation, but needs to devote
its attention as well to the ways in which specific technologies and artifacts help
to shape specific forms of praxis and interpretation. It needs to think “forward”
rather than “backward” about technology. Only then will the hermeneutical
perspective genuinely be able to make visible the role that technology plays in the
way in which “reality” appears to us. Technology will then not appear as a form of
alienation from the “full richness” of reality, but as a form of mediation of the
relation between human beings and reality. A philosophy of technology that aims
to answer the hermeneutic question asking what role technology plays in human
interpretations of reality should analyze this very mediating role of technology, in
close contact with the empirical reality of technology.


The second avenue of criticism that I want to develop concerns the references to
Heidegger’s philosophy of technology as nostalgic.  In his works, Heidegger
creates a sharp opposition between modern technologies and traditional techniques. The former he judges negatively, thanks to the one-dimensional and
dominating way of revealing with which they are linked, while the latter he
assesses to have “released” and “let things be.”  Heidegger’s arguments for valuing traditional techniques over modern ones
appear to be susceptible to fundamental criticism.According to Ihde, Heidegger’s descriptions of traditional and modern technologies are colored by the “romantic thesis” that traditional technologies are
preferable to modern ones . One involves Heidegger’s comparison between
the windmill and the hydroelectric plant in “The Question Concerning Technology,”The hydroelectric plant, according to Heidegger, is connected with the disclosure of the Rhine as standing-reserve—the Rhine is
“ordered” to supply energy. The windmill, by contrast, does not disclose the
wind in the same way: “Its sails do indeed turn in the wind; they are left entirely
to the wind’s blowing. But the windmill does not unlock energy from the air currents in order to store it.

pg68 inconsistency
For Ihde, there is no difference in kind,
only difference in degree, between a hydroelectric plant and a waterwheel; even
the waterwheel “sets” a river “to supplying its hydraulic pressure” (Heidegger
1977a, 16).

According to Ihde, Heidegger is selective in his descriptions not only of traditional technologies, but of modern technologies as well. Ihde supports this claim
by critiquing Heidegger’s famous description of the bridge in “Building, Dwelling,
Thinking.” In his late period, during which he wrote this essay, Heidegger creates
an ever starker contrast between two ways of disclosing reality: as “standingreserve” and as “fourfold” (Geviert). The fourfold, for Heidegger, is the world as it is gathered by “earth and sky, divinities and mortals” . A bridge, for Heidegger, is a good example of such a “thing”:

For Heidegger, only pretechnological or traditional artifacts such as bridges, jugs,
and chalices reveal reality in terms of the fourfold. Ihde finds this too limited; why
could not modern technologies also reveal the world in terms of the fourfold?
Consider, for instance, Ihde’s provocative “phenomenology of the Shoreham
nuclear power plant,” which was constructed but never operated on the shores of
Long Island Sound:


In a word, Ihde’s critique boils down to the fact that Heidegger’s nostalgia rests
more on romance than on argumentation. Heidegger makes plausible neither
why traditional technologies could not reveal reality as raw materials nor why
modern technologies would not be able to reveal the fourfold.
To Ihde’s critique I would add that Heidegger’s nostalgic conception can be
understood as a product of his transcendentalist approach. Because Heidegger
reduces technology to the way of disclosing reality that underlies it, he discerns
only that specific way of disclosing when he analyzes technology; he finds only
what he has already projected. 
In earlier
sendings, being was not yet concealed, and because of this, Heidegger also lets the
specific technologies of these periods help to reveal being. In the contemporary
sending of being, however, being hides itself, which Heidegger connects with the
way in which modern technologies reveal reality. Heidegger, that is, does not
investigate the differences between the ways in which traditional and modern
technologies reveal reality, but instead infers the way of revealing from the sending
of being that underlies the specific technologies.Only by making use of these two perspectives simultaneously can Heidegger
support his nostalgic preference for traditional technology.An ambiguity thus eventually emerges in Heidegger’s conception of being., Heidegger’s understanding of modern technology in terms of alienation,
in which something originary gets lost, would not have been possible without
applying a double standard.
Heidegger develops his two standards in two different contexts. The historical
standard, which forms the background from which he analyzes modern technology in “The Question Concerning Technology,” approaches technology as
“producing” or “making.” The ahistorical standard, from which he analyzes traditional technologies in “Building, Dwelling, Thinking” and “The Thing,” is
addressed to the objects that are technically produced. The mill
might indeed figure historically as an exponent of another phase in the history of
being—but what it makes visible is precisely the ahistorical aspect of being,
namely, that being is essentially an event of “coming into being.” 
 The mill is
not a consequence of a historical epoch in the history of being, as is the hydroelectric plant according to Heidegger; rather, it makes visible being itself.
Ihde’s charge that Heidegger’s nostalgic contrast between tradition and modernity is untenable can now be more fundamentally supported. Heidegger measures
tradition and modernity with different scales. When he speaks about traditional
technology, he does so in ahistorical terms; when he speaks about modern technologies, he is a historian. Heidegger’s “path of thinking,” as Pöggeler indicates,
i.e., Heidegger’s philosophy (Pöggeler 1991), appears to be a two-way street.
To Be or Not To Be
Heidegger’s hermeneutic philosophy of technology appears to raise two problems.
His approach is abstract and monolithic in that he reduces specific technological
artifacts to historical products of the history of being, a history that develops itself
beyond human control; and he has a nostalgic preference for traditional technology, supported by an ambiguous approach to the relation between technology and
being. When he compares specific technologies of past and present with each
other, he applies two different standards, reserving a historical perspective for an
analysis of modern technologies and an ahistorical perspective for traditional
technologies. His early writings especially is a fruitful point of departure for a philosophy of technology that takes artifacts seriously, both as a material culture in
which reality acquires new meanings and as objects that provide human beings
with new means of actualizing their existence.


heidegger and things

 For in his early principal work,
Being and Time, and other early works we can find another, albeit implicit, philosophy of technology. The stark contrast between Heidegger’s early and late approaches to technology is linked with the so-called Kehre or turn that his philosophy took. “The
Question Concerning Technology” and “The Memorial Address” were composed after the Kehre; Being and Time before.t, Heidegger sought access to being
itself via clarification of the human way of being. Later, however, he tried to
think being itself, in terms of the ways in which it could be understood and in
which it manifests itself.

 I shall show how Heidegger
reduces the thing more and more to “being,” which only needs the thing as a
medium to manifest itself. By looking at the transformation in Heidegger’s
thinking from the perspective of his approach to things, it becomes possible on
the one hand to show the importance and the specific character of a “philosophy
of technology from things,” and on the other hand to take a first step toward
finding a point of departure for such an approach of technology.
Tools as Providing Access to the World
In Being and Time, Heidegger works out his own, much extended version of
Husserl’s phenomenology. While Husserl’s phenomenology consisted of the
transcendental elucidation of the relation between consciousness and reality,
Heidegger concerned himself with the relation between human existence and its
world.

Heidegger
describes the relation between humans and world not as “intentionality,” as
Husserl had, but as “being-in-the-world.”14
In Heidegger’s analysis of “being-in-the-world” things play an important role;
indeed, in the form of tools they make it possible that relations between humans
and the world come about.

Things belong
to the realm of praxis and must be approached pragmatically; i.e., in relation to
the behavior of human beings. Such behavior, as a way of being-in-the-world,
Heidegger calls besorgen: heeding or taking care, the concernful dealing with the
world that gives form to human existence. The objects that play a role in such
heeding are called Zeug: tools, equipment, useful things.



 The way of being a tool or piece of equipment has when in use
Heidegger calls Zuhandenheit: “handiness” in the newer translation, or “readinessto-hand” in the older.Things, in short, disclose a world. 




As i shall make clear in the chapters to come, with this analysis Heidegger provides the first
building blocks for a more satisfactory approach to technology. For he understands technology here in terms of concrete artifacts rather than by reducing it to
its conditions, and also makes clear how these artifacts allow human beings to
have access to reality.
The opposition between the early and late Heidegger that comes to light here
has everything to do with the turn in his thinking. Beforehand, in order to
understand being, Heidegger applied himself to an analysis of human existence
in its relations to beings and its own being; afterward, to the history and selfmanifestation of being itself.


 For the late Heidegger, the disclosure of a river as a
source of water power amounts to a “setting upon” and ordering of nature as an
energy source, à la the hydroelectric plant. Moreover, the involvement of human
beings in the referential network of instruments is reminiscent of what Heidegger
will later call the Gestell.

. According to Dreyfus, the most one can say is that Heidegger’s
picture of technology in Being and Time is ambiguous, and lies midway between
ancient technè and modern technology.


 Heidegger characterizes the technology of the ancient Greeks as “bringing to presence” and
modern technology as “setting-upon” and “ordering,” but in Being and Time he
speaks about equipment in terms of its function, its “in order to.” This functionalization of equipment, according to Dreyfus, can be seen as a necessary
intermediary step in the changeover from craft-like to modern technology.



 while for craftlike technology nature was still physis, something that brought itself to presence
and to which technè was subordinate, and while for modern technology nature
was standing-reserve, Heidegger speaks of it in Being and Time as “raw material.”


However plausible it may seem to discover a middle step between technè and
Gestell, it would be wrong to follow Dreyfus fully here, for he ignores an important and innovative aspect of Heidegger’s analysis of tools and equipment: 

. While Heidegger’s claim that nature is revealed in dealings with
tools as a forest of timber or as a source of water power might be specifically
linked to a historical phase of technology, his analysis of presence-at-hand and
readiness-to-hand is not.In Being and Time, however, Heidegger.

sought to understand the role that specific technologies played in the relations
between human beings and reality—an approach that, as I shall show, provides a
point of departure for a “philosophy of technological artifacts.”18
Equipment: Between Thing and Artwork
Heidegger’s essay “The Origin of the Work of Art” marks the cautious beginning
of what would become his Kehre. Here, too, he devotes considerable attention to
tools and equipment, though he approaches them not with an eye to their role in
praxis, but rather to the way in which they differ from two other kinds of objects,
the “mere thing” (das bloße Ding) and the artwork.


Heidegger conceives the piece of equipment here no longer in relation to the
human beings who engage with it, but in relation to other objects. On the one
hand it, like the “mere thing,” is an object, though an object that is produced by human beings. On the other hand it, like the artwork, is produced by human
beings, but it contrasts with an artwork because it requires a context of use in
order to be genuinely present as a piece of equipment. Moreover, pieces of equipment themselves are the products of a making process in which matter is brought in a
specific form. “As determinations of beings, accordingly, matter and form have
their proper place in the essential nature of equipment.Meanwhile, the artwork appears as a piece of matter that was intentionally given
a specific form, and that is not usable either but adds to its pure thingliness an
aesthetic value. What makes a
thing a thing, according to Heidegger, is to be sought in its way of being, the way
it is present to human beings in their relation to it.


His question is therefore:
What makes a useful object a useful object? In Being and Time, he observed that
a useful object is present as such when it withdraws from our attention in favor
of the work being accomplished.  According to Heidegger, therefore,
reliability is the way of being of equipment.t. In “The
Origin of the Work of Art,” the reliability of the useful thing is what gives human
beings access to the world. An artwork “is” in a completely different way
than a piece of equipment. In contrast to the piece of equipment, which can
only be present as equipment when used, the artwork rests within itself. In this
self-containment, according to Heidegger, it is able to bring beings into unconcealment to disclose a world. The art work opens up in its
own way the Being of beings.. In “The Origin of the
Work of Art,” Heidegger links this dimension of the coming to presence of beings,
which precedes the disclosure of beings by equipment, with the work of art. For
there to be beings for us in the context of significance of a world, these beings have
to be unconcealed, disclosed—which is precisely what a work of art does. in “The Origin of the Work of Art,” Heidegger introduces the concept of
“earth” alongside that of “world.” Heidegger conceives the artwork as the setting into work of a “struggle”
between world and earth; it is shaped out of the concealment of the earth, and
discloses this earth into a world. Heidegger speaks of a “struggle” here.In this struggle, truth, conceived as unconcealment
(alètheia), “happens.” As Pöggeler puts it: “The structure of truth as unconcealment is the togetherness of world and earth.“The Origin of the Work of Art” announces Heidegger’s turn toward being.
He gradually develops a new way of thinking about beings, and therefore about
technological equipment and artifacts. He
begins to question no longer “forward,” into the world which exists around an
object, but now “backward,” into the conditions of possibility of the origin of the
world and the object; their “coming into being.” The emerging priority of that
coming into being makes progressively less relevant the world-disclosing capability
of tools and equipment.Heidegger’s analysis of the Greek temple explicitly shows how a specific
artifact can call a world into appearance and thereby make visible the happening
of becoming unconcealed. 

The Thing Things

“Building, Dwelling, Thinking” and “The Thing” form the next step in the development of Heidegger’s understanding of things.“The thing,” according to Heidegger, is in a position to let a world come into
being, and indeed in a specific way. He poses to himself the question of “what a
thing is as thing.” His answer appears at first glance cryptic enough: he says that
“the thing things” . What, then, is the “thinging” of a
thing? Heidegger finds this in the “gathering of the fourfold.” The thing calls
forth a world by opening a space for the earth and sky, divinities and mortals. In
“Building, Dwelling, Thinking,” as already mentioned, Heidegger appeals to the
example of a bridge: “The bridge gathers the earth as landscape around the
stream,” its arches “ready for the sky’s weather and its fickle nature,” escorting
“the lingering and hastening ways” of mortals as they go about their business,
but always “before the divinities,” and in a way that can allow us to “think of, and
visibly give thanks for, their presence” . in “The Thing” Heidegger begins to lose sight of things themselves. While
Heidegger’s speaking about the “thinging” of the thing suggests that he is trying
to develop a way of thinking about things that does not reduce them to something non-thingly, he does not finally succeed in so doing.


The “letting come into being,” through which Heidegger only understood the
manner of presencing of a work of art in “The Origin of the Work of Art,” becomes
in “The Thing” and “Building, Dwelling, Thinking” the way to understand things in
general and useful things in particular. A useful thing no longer discloses a world by
shaping human praxis and thus the relation between human beings and their world,
but lets the world come to being as fourfold. The thing, therefore, becomes no more
than an intermediary, a spot where being does its work, without the thing itself
playing an active role in the way in which a world comes to presence.
From Things to Being
“The Question Concerning Technology” constitutes the final step in the transition
in Heidegger’s thought from things to being that announces itself through things.
 Heidegger adds a further dimension to the “coming into being”: it happens always inside a specific way of revealing,
a historical “sending” of being. Things no longer play an active role in the way in which human beings have
access to reality, as the piece of equipment did in Being and Time and “The Origin
of the Work of Art,” but instead merely express an always historical meaning of
being.It is not the machines that disclose beings as standing-reserve; rather, the machines
exist only because beings are already present as standing-reserve.

The being of the Rhine, as disclosed by a hydroelectric plant, is forgotten,
while the being of the temple environment “happens” precisely because of the
temple itself. What prevents a power plant from letting its environment come to
presence in just the way a temple does? The question calls for an answer, but
from Heidegger’s perspective in “The Question Concerning Technology” it is no
longer relevant. Heidegger, after all, insists that in the epoch of machines being
takes such a form that it is not understood anymore as “coming to presence” but
only as a product of human activity. Heidegger now thinks radically from the
perspective of being, and technologies themselves ultimately have no role to play
in such an approach.Meanwhile, Heidegger thinks not only modern technological devices from
the perspective of being, but also traditional technical objects like tools and
pieces of equipment.. In “The Origin of the Work of Art” Heidegger continued to
conceive them in this way, but he also contrasted them with artworks in order to
make clear that tools and equipment lack the ability of the artwork to “let come
into being.” 


“The Question Concerning Technology”
thus addresses itself to technology not in the sense of “technological objects” but
in the sense of “producing.” It is precisely this that makes possible a connection
with being, for in production a thing comes to “be.” Production is therefore the
outstanding point of contact with which to place technology in the context of
being and to make visible how objects come into being in different ways.
That Heidegger approaches technology here principally in terms of making





After all, the examples I gave above of the ways in
which certain modern technologies can disclose reality other than as standingreserve, together with Heidegger’s own analysis of tools and equipment in Being and
Time, reveal how insufficient the picture of technology is that emerges from the
works of the late Heidegger. Heidegger’s transcendentalist approach is not able to
give an adequate account of modern, technological artifacts.
It can be concluded that Heidegger’s concern for things continued to disappear from his work as it continued to progress. In contrast to what is suggested
by his own formula that “the thing things,” he appears to have turned away from
things in the course of his thinking. However much Heidegger may have thought
about objects, ultimately he reduced them, by backward thinking, to the being
that announces itself through them. Only his early work offers a connection,
thinking forward, to answer the question of the role that things play in the way
in which reality can be present to human beings. I shall be building on these
analyses for the remainder of this book.
conclusion
In Heidegger’s philosophy of technology, technology can be regarded neither as
a means nor as a human activity, but rather must be regarded as a way of disclosing
reality.


In the epoch of modern technology,
according to Heidegger, reality is disclosed as a standing-reserve of raw material and
energy available for our use—not because we humans will it to be that way, but
because this is the way the world manifests itself to us.To retrieve openness to being, according to Heidegger, humans have to await
the arrival of a new way of being.

 A condition for the emergence of a new way
of being is that humans neither hold themselves apart from technology, nor fully
give themselves over to it. It requires, rather, an attitude of “releasement” vis-àvis technological artifacts, in which humans use them without letting them fully
determine their relation to the world. Such releasement preserves the space to be
open for the coming into being of entities and for the possibility of a new way of
being, in which being itself is no longer concealed.


The most important critique to be made of this approach is that Heidegger
does not fully succeed in developing an adequate hermeneutical perspective on
technology, for he reduces technology to its conditions of possibility and thereby
fails to connect with specific technologies. Such a transcendentalist approach,
however, appears to be characteristic only of his later thought, beginning with
the period of the Kehre. The early Heidegger, in Being and Time, does provide a
substantial foundation for a hermeneutical philosophy of technology that analyzes the role that actual technologies play in the way in which reality acquires
meaning for human beings. For in Being and Time he does not see technological
artifacts as manifestations of a sending of being, but instead tries to investigate
how actual tools and equipment constitute networks of meaning.
These early initiatives by Heidegger therefore can provide the foundations for
a phenomenological philosophy of technology that takes actual technologies
seriously. Only by thinking from actual technological artifacts can a philosophy
of technology be developed that genuinely addresses technology instead of its conditions. Such an approach would do justice to the thought contained in the
phrase, “the thing things,” for only then would the thing not be reduced to
something non-thingly but thought as thing.



Pg 99 

r in the philosophies of Jaspers and Heidegger.
Technology is primarily conceived as a form of alienation:

Heidegger showed
that tools and equipment give shape to the encounter between humans and
their world.The tools are then, in Heidegger’s
words, “ready-to-hand.”.The crucial question now concerns the various ways in which things, on the basis
of their readiness-to-hand, play a role in the human-world relation.Things, therefore, are not neutral “intermediaries” between
humans and world, but mediators: they actively mediate this relation.

Pg 114 $$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$ VERY IMPORTANT$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$


Ihde finds in Heidegger’s analysis of the ways in which tools are present for
human beings three elements of special significance. First, Heidegger shows that
each tool, each piece of equipment is related to a context. In itself it is nothing; as a
piece of equipment it is part of a meaningful whole. “This field within which a tool
is what it can be is a complex one filled with ‘involvements’ or cross-relations”
(Ihde 1990, 32). Second, it is clear from Heidegger’s analysis that equipment has an
“instrumental intentionality”; a tool is “something in order to,” and in that “in
order to” there is always a reference of the tool to a use context, to whatever can be
done with it (32). By the concept of “intentionality” here Ihde means the directionality of the instrument and not the intentional relation between human beings and
world, to which the phenomenological term usually refers.2 The third element that
Ihde finds of special significance is that the tool or piece of equipment, in use,
becomes the means rather than the object of our experience.


e Heidegger analyzes the ways in which artifacts are present to
human beings, “withdrawing” from their experience,

The technological mediation of perception, whether embodied or hermeneutic, has consequences for the ways in which human beings experience their
world: artifacts transform experience. Later in this chapter I shall develop the
hermeneutic implications of this insight.
Alterity Relations
The second human-technology relation described by Ihde is the alterity relation.
In alterity relations humans are not related, as in mediating relations, via a tech126 | what things do
05.Verbeek Chapter 4 1/17/05 2:05 PM Page 126
nology to the world; rather, they are related to or with a technology.



Latour:
 But once it breaks, Latour says—
wholly but unintentionally in line with Heidegger’s analysis of the tool—we are
forcibly reminded of its existence. 



work of the German-American philosopher of technology
Albert Borgmann as a point of departure. Borgmann has
written extensively about the role of technology in shaping
human existence and in the definition of “the good life.”


Borgmann was strongly influenced by Heidegger. Indeed,
his philosophy of technology can be read as an extension
and elaboration of “The Question Concerning Technology”
and “The Thing.”1 But even though I counted Heidegger’s
philosophy of technology as part of the hermeneutical perspective, it is very well
possible to use Borgmann’s work to elaborate the existential perspective, as will
become clear. However, his work, too, must be treated critically, inasmuch as his
Heideggerian inspiration sometimes brings him into proximity with the diagnosis
of alienation that infects much classical philosophy of technology. Nevertheless,
Borgmann makes a welcome and new contribution to the tradition from which
his work springs. In his analysis of technology, he directs his attention not to
“Technology” as a monolithic force, but rather to specific technological artifacts.
He addresses the question of the role that technology plays in the shaping of
human existence, by reducing it neither to a Gestell nor to a kind of functional
and bureaucratic outfitting of society, as Heidegger and Jaspers did, but by investigating the patterns that technological artifacts give rise to in human life.





Embodiment relations, however, have a remarkable content here. The way in
which artifacts are present in this relation can be indicated as “readiness-to-hand,”
as we saw in Heidegger’s tool analysis,  For Heidegger, an essential characteristic of a ready-to-hand artifact
was that it does not call attention to itself, but withdraws from attention in order
to direct attention to the work to be done with it. Borgmann himself formulates
a related thought when he claims that the machinery of devices places itself as
much as possible in the background, so that human beings only have to attend to
what the device does for them.







Heidegger assigned to useful objects a place midway between pure things and
artworks. A useful artifact is not a pure thing, for it has to be made just as does
the artwork. But neither is it an artwork, for it must be used in order to be present
as useful. In its use it withdraws from our attention—again, in contrast to the
artwork, which imposes itself on us and whose presence we linger over—though
it should be noted that, as demonstrated in the previous chapters, a useful object
never completely withdraws, as Heidegger thought, but can evoke a certain measure
of engagement with itself. In precisely such use—and also in the possibility of
engaging with products during that use—lies the potential for extending the
“aesthetics of things” beyond the realm of the visual. Aesthetics comes from the
ancient Greek word aesthèsis, which means “sensory perception.” Aesthetics
should therefore be located in the sensory relation of human beings to the world,
a relation that is not solely visual but that involves other senses as well. In certain
product use, for instance, the sense of touch is at least as important as sight. After
some practice, many products can be used without looking, though they could
not be used at all without touching.




Concluding Remarks

 A detailed analysis of the
classical philosophy of technology revealed that the lack of such a perspective is
at fault for its one-sided and simplified perspective on technology. Technology is
reduced to its conditions of possibility, such as a technological way of thinking
and a functional outfitting of society, that are required to keep our technological
culture working. But the conclusions that this way of thinking and this social
organization lead to loss of meaning and loss of self is much too premature.

A suitable framework for thinking from the perspective of things can be
provided by a reinterpretation of phenomenology in a way that can be called
postphenomenological. In this perspective the relation between human beings
and their world takes center stage, and are viewed as mutually constituting each
other—human beings are what they are thanks to the ways in which they are
present in their world, and their world is what it is thanks to how it appears to
them. 

Things—and
in our current culture especially technological artifacts—mediate how human beings
are present in their world and how the world is present to them; they shape both
subjectivity and objectivity.



 I did so on the basis of the original meaning of the word “aesthetics”: the study of the senses. By approaching
products only as signs the emphasis falls too one-sidedly on visual aspects, while
from the perspective of their uses all of the other senses also become important.
Giving due attention to these sensorial dimensions of the use of objects will make
their materiality again relevant.


t. A material aesthetics makes it possible to anticipate
this mediating ability of products and incorporate it into the design process.
The design of technology thereby becomes no longer an internal technological
affair, but appears to be a moral matter as well. Technologies are not merely
functional objects that also have dimensions of style and meaning; they mediate
artifacts in design | 235
08.Verbeek Chapter 7 1/17/05 2:09 PM Page 235
the relations between human beings and their world, and thereby shape human
experiences and existence. Technologies help to determine how people act, so
that it is not only people but also things who give answers to the classical moral
question, “How to live?” It is time that we take the contributions of technology
seriously and combine our forces to provide new answers to this ancient question that still applies to the technological world in which we live
































































































































































































































































































































































































